Update Documentation: new CC adoption page and leftover cleanup (#38088)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/optimizing-builds/configuration-cache/configuration_cache_requirements.adoc

For example, instead of referencing a Project to retrieve `project.version` at execution time, declare the project version as a `Property<String>` input.
Similarly, instead of referencing a `SourceSet` for source files or classpath resolution, declare these as a `FileCollection` input.

A common pattern reaches into `project.version` (or another model value) from within a task action:

====

> [.multi-language-sample]

Reviewer: This file should use snippets.  Claude should be able to extract them easily.

Reviewer: I also stopped carefully verifying each one.  Moving them to snippets should confirm they work.  The CC team should confirm they are the correct recommendations.

Author: Ok i snippetized anything longer than 4 lines as per the doc rules!

====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
abstract class WriteVersionStampTask : DefaultTask() {
    @get:Input
    abstract val version: Property<String>

    @get:OutputFile
    abstract val output: RegularFileProperty

    @TaskAction
    fun run() {
        output.get().asFile.writeText(version.get())
    }
}

tasks.register<WriteVersionStampTask>("writeVersionStamp") {
    version = providers.provider { project.version.toString() }
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file("version.txt")
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
abstract class WriteVersionStampTask extends DefaultTask {
    @Input
    abstract Property<String> getVersion()

    @OutputFile
    abstract RegularFileProperty getOutput()

    @TaskAction
    void run() {
        output.get().asFile.text = version.get()
    }
}

tasks.register('writeVersionStamp', WriteVersionStampTask) {
    version = providers.provider { project.version.toString() }
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file('version.txt')
}
----
=====
====

> What changed:

Reviewer: Use <1> callouts for these?

Author: Done. And added to all snippets.

----
tasks.register("writeVersionStamp") {
    val output = layout.buildDirectory.file("version.txt")
    outputs.file(output)
    doLast {
        // BAD: project.version is the live Project model, accessed at execution time
        output.get().asFile.writeText(project.version.toString())
    }
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
tasks.register('writeVersionStamp') {
    def output = layout.buildDirectory.file('version.txt')
    outputs.file output
    doLast {
        // BAD: project.version is the live Project model, accessed at execution time
        output.get().asFile.text = project.version.toString()
    }
}
----
=====
====

The Configuration Cache-compatible version captures the value into a typed input property at configuration time, then reads from that property at execution time:

====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
abstract class WriteVersionStampTask : DefaultTask() {
    @get:Input
    abstract val version: Property<String>

    @get:OutputFile
    abstract val output: RegularFileProperty

    @TaskAction
    fun run() {
        output.get().asFile.writeText(version.get())
    }
}

> tasks.register<WriteVersionStampTask>("writeVersionStamp") {

Reviewer 2: 🤔 Maybe we can still give folks some guidance on how to set up an ad hoc task that is CC compatible rather than scare them away by full-blown tasks.

FTR it would look like:
```kotlin
tasks.register("writeVersionStamp") {
    val version = provider { project.version.toString() }
    inputs.property("version", version) // not required by the Configuration Cache, but good practice.

    val output = layout.buildDirectory.file("version.txt")
    outputs.file(output)
    doLast {
        output.get().asFile.writeText(version.get())
    }
}
```

Author: I like it. I added it.

The pre-Configuration Cache pattern reaches directly into another task's properties from within a task action. Here `processData` reads the output of `generateData` by holding a reference to the task and dereferencing it at execution time:

====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
val generateData = tasks.register<GenerateDataTask>("generateData") {
    outputFile = layout.buildDirectory.file("data.json")
}

tasks.register("processData") {
    dependsOn(generateData)
    doLast {
        // BAD: reading another task's property at execution time
        val source = generateData.get().outputFile.get().asFile
        println("Processing ${source.readText()}")
    }
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
def generateData = tasks.register('generateData', GenerateDataTask) {
    outputFile = layout.buildDirectory.file('data.json')
}

tasks.register('processData') {
    dependsOn generateData
    doLast {
        // BAD: reading another task's property at execution time
        def source = generateData.get().outputFile.get().asFile
        println "Processing ${source.text}"
    }
}
----
=====
====

> Under the Configuration Cache, `generateData.get()` would either fail outright (because the captured `TaskProvider` references a `Project`) or be serialized as a foreign task instance that does not reflect the actual execution-time state.

Reviewer 2: :x: This should fail serialization because a task cannot hold a `TaskProvider` referring to another task, directly or indirectly. It has to be either wrapped into `ConfigurableFileCollection` (where it becomes task output files), or `.map`-ed, or `.flatMap`-ed.

Instead, any value relevant to task execution should be explicitly modeled as a task property to ensure proper caching and reproducibility.

A common pre-Configuration Cache pattern stores configuration values on a task's `ExtraPropertiesExtension` (the `ext` block) and reads them from within a task action. Here a `release` task reads a banner from `ext.banner`:

====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
tasks.register("release") {
    extra["banner"] = "=== Releasing build ${rootProject.version} ==="
    doLast {
        // BAD: reading extra properties at execution time

>         val banner: String by extra

Reviewer 2: :x: I think `by extra` is deprecated since 9.6.
```suggestion
        val banner = extra["banner"] as String
```

    banner = providers.provider { "=== Releasing build ${rootProject.version} ===" }
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
abstract class ReleaseTask extends DefaultTask {
    @Input
    abstract Property<String> getBanner()

    @TaskAction
    void run() {
        println banner.get()
    }
}

tasks.register('release', ReleaseTask) {
    banner = providers.provider { "=== Releasing build ${rootProject.version} ===" }
}
----
=====
====

What changed:

* The value moves from `extra` / `ext` storage into a typed `@Input Property<String>` on the task.
* The task action reads from `banner.get()` (a serialized field on the task instance) instead of the extension storage.
* The wiring at registration uses `providers.provider { ... }` so the value is captured lazily at the configuration-to-execution boundary, which is also what makes the `rootProject.version` capture itself Configuration Cache-safe (see <<config_cache:requirements:gradle_model_types, Gradle Model Types>>).
* Because the input is now declared with `@Input`, Gradle includes it in up-to-date checking, which improves correctness as a side benefit.

> 

Reviewer 2: 🤔 We can also cover a bit more convoluted use case where you do not control the task, but build extensions for it and add actions to consume them. There the proper solution is something like:
```kotlin
interface MyExtension {
  val myProperty: Property<String>
}

tasks.configureEach<AlienTask>() {
   val myExt = extensions.create<MyExtension>("myExt")
}

// BAD
tasks.configureEach<AlienTask>() {
   doLast {
      println(extensions.getByType<MyExtension>().myProperty.get())
   }
}

// GOOD
tasks.configureEach<AlienTask>() {
   val actionInput = extensions.getByType<MyExtension>().myProperty
   inputs.property("myProperty", actionInput) // Not required, but nice to keep up-to-date checks working
   doLast {
      println(actionInput.get())
   }
}
```

Author: Added.

The Configuration Cache provides supported replacements for the two most common patterns: observing task execution events, and running logic at the end of the build.

=== Replacing `taskGraph.afterTask` and `buildFinished` with a Build Service

The pre-Configuration Cache pattern registers a closure that captures script-level state. Here a callback collects failed tasks and prints them at the end of the build:

====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
val failedTasks = mutableListOf<String>()

gradle.taskGraph.afterTask {
    if (state.failure != null) {
        failedTasks.add(path)
    }
}

gradle.buildFinished {
    if (failedTasks.isNotEmpty()) {
        println("Failed tasks: ${failedTasks.joinToString()}")
    }
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
def failedTasks = []

gradle.taskGraph.afterTask { Task task, TaskState state ->
    if (state.failure != null) {
        failedTasks << task.path
    }
}

gradle.buildFinished {
    if (failedTasks) {
        println "Failed tasks: ${failedTasks.join(', ')}"
    }
}
----
=====
====

> Under the Configuration Cache, both callbacks are part of the configuration phase, so they will not fire on a cache hit. They are also incompatible at the registration site, since the closures capture mutable script state.

Reviewer 2: 🤔 I'm not sure if "part of the configuration phase" actually helps. With CC, they will not fire on a cache miss either. CC prohibits registering any of these listeners (emitting a problem), so there will be no cache hit at all but a store failure. Only in the warning mode, where registration-side problem is not fatal, one can see callbacks not firing in an otherwise working build.

    private final List<String> failedTasks = []

    @Override
    void onFinish(FinishEvent event) {
        if (event instanceof TaskFinishEvent && event.result instanceof TaskFailureResult) {
            failedTasks << event.descriptor.taskPath
        }
    }

    @Override
    void close() {
        if (failedTasks) {
            println "Failed tasks: ${failedTasks.join(', ')}"
        }
    }
}

def collector = gradle.sharedServices.registerIfAbsent('failureCollector', FailureCollector) {}
def eventListenerRegistry = project.gradle.services.get(BuildEventsListenerRegistry)
eventListenerRegistry.onTaskCompletion(collector)
----
=====
====

What changed:

* `gradle.taskGraph.afterTask` is replaced by a `BuildService` that implements `OperationCompletionListener`. The service receives `TaskFinishEvent` instances at execution time.
* `gradle.buildFinished` end-of-build logic moves into the service's `close()` method. Gradle calls `close()` when the service is no longer needed, on both cache hits and cache misses.
* The mutable script-level `failedTasks` list is replaced by a field on the service. State is owned by the service instance, not captured by a closure.

> * Registering the service with `BuildEventsListenerRegistry.onTaskCompletion` is the supported way to make the service survive the configuration-to-execution boundary under the Configuration Cache. Other ways of holding a build service reference (such as a captured `Provider` in a closure or lambda) may not survive a cache hit cleanly.

Reviewer 2: 🤔 FWIW, in the sample the service doesn't materialize at configuration time at all. Maybe we can omit this, as we have the special handling of `OperationCompletionListener`-services documented in some other place

Author: Removed.

        output.get().asFile.text = "Build ${buildNumber.get()}"
    }
}

tasks.register('stampBuild', StampBuildTask) {
    // BAD: reads the env var at configuration time
    buildNumber = System.getenv('BUILD_NUMBER') ?: 'local'
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file('build-stamp.txt')
}
----
=====
====

This works, but the env-var read happens during configuration, so changing `BUILD_NUMBER` invalidates the Configuration Cache and re-runs the configuration phase on every CI build.

The Configuration Cache-friendly version uses `providers.environmentVariable()` and pipes the lazy provider into the task property:

====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
tasks.register<StampBuildTask>("stampBuild") {
    buildNumber = providers.environmentVariable("BUILD_NUMBER").orElse("local")
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file("build-stamp.txt")
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
tasks.register('stampBuild', StampBuildTask) {
    buildNumber = providers.environmentVariable('BUILD_NUMBER').orElse('local')
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file('build-stamp.txt')
}
----
=====
====

What changed:

> * `System.getenv("BUILD_NUMBER")` is replaced by `providers.environmentVariable("BUILD_NUMBER")`. The `Provider` is captured into the task property; the resolved value is read at execution time.

Reviewer 2: 🤔 
```suggestion
* `System.getenv("BUILD_NUMBER")` is replaced by `providers.environmentVariable("BUILD_NUMBER")`. The `Provider` is stored into the task property but the actual variable read happens only at execution time when the value is requested.
```

* The fallback `?: "local"` becomes `.orElse("local")` on the provider.

> * The env var still becomes a build configuration input (changing its value invalidates the cache), but the read is now declared rather than implicit. The Configuration Cache report can see exactly which variables a build observed, and `providers.environmentVariable()` participates in the cache fingerprint correctly.

Reviewer 2: :x: This is incorrect. The whole point of these providers is to avoid build inputs.

====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
abstract class GenerateReportTask : DefaultTask() {
    @get:Input
    abstract val title: Property<String>

    @get:OutputFile
    abstract val output: RegularFileProperty

    @TaskAction
    fun run() {
        output.get().asFile.writeText("Title: ${title.get()}")
    }
}

tasks.register<GenerateReportTask>("generateReport") {
    // BAD: file read happens during configuration
    title = file("config/title.txt").readText().trim()
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file("report.txt")
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
abstract class GenerateReportTask extends DefaultTask {
    @Input
    abstract Property<String> getTitle()

    @OutputFile
    abstract RegularFileProperty getOutput()

    @TaskAction
    void run() {
        output.get().asFile.text = "Title: ${title.get()}"
    }
}

tasks.register('generateReport', GenerateReportTask) {
    // BAD: file read happens during configuration
    title = file('config/title.txt').text.trim()
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file('report.txt')
}
----
=====
====

> This file read is invisible to Gradle. The file's contents become an implicit input but are not tracked as such, so changes to `config/title.txt` may or may not invalidate the cache depending on whether Gradle happens to detect the read.

Reviewer 2: :x: "This file read is invisible to Gradle." - it is visible, and tracked with a decent level of provenance.

The Configuration Cache-friendly version reads the file through `providers.fileContents()`:

====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
tasks.register<GenerateReportTask>("generateReport") {
    title = providers.fileContents(layout.projectDirectory.file("config/title.txt"))
        .asText
        .map { it.trim() }
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file("report.txt")
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
tasks.register('generateReport', GenerateReportTask) {
    title = providers.fileContents(layout.projectDirectory.file('config/title.txt'))
        .asText
        .map { it.trim() }
    output = layout.buildDirectory.file('report.txt')
}
----
=====
====

What changed:

* `file("config/title.txt").readText()` is replaced by `providers.fileContents(...).asText`. The file becomes a tracked Configuration Cache input.
* The `.trim()` post-processing happens inside `.map { ... }` on the provider, so it stays lazy and runs at execution time.

> * The file is now part of the build configuration fingerprint. Changing its contents correctly invalidates the cache; leaving it unchanged correctly hits the cache.

Reviewer 2: :x: As nothing resolves the provider at configuration time, there will be no configuration input.

    fun run() {
        // ... uses apiToken.get() to call the registry
    }
}

tasks.register<PublishArtifactTask>("publishArtifact") {
    // BAD: the literal token value is captured into the task field at configuration time
    apiToken = System.getenv("REGISTRY_TOKEN") ?: ""
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
abstract class PublishArtifactTask extends DefaultTask {
    @Input
    abstract Property<String> getApiToken()

    @TaskAction
    void run() {
        // ... uses apiToken.get() to call the registry
    }
}

tasks.register('publishArtifact', PublishArtifactTask) {
    // BAD: the literal token value is captured into the task field at configuration time
    apiToken = System.getenv('REGISTRY_TOKEN') ?: ''
}
----
=====
====

Under the Configuration Cache, the resolved string value of `REGISTRY_TOKEN` is serialized into the cache entry alongside the rest of the task graph. The entry is encrypted on disk, but the value still lives in the file. The environment variable also becomes a build configuration input, so changing the token invalidates the cache (which produces a cache miss for every CI build that rotates credentials).

> The Configuration Cache-friendly pattern stores the secret in `GRADLE_USER_HOME/gradle.properties` (whose contents are *not* included in the cache, only its fingerprint) and reads it through `providers.gradleProperty()`. The lazy provider defers the read to execution time:

Reviewer 2: :x: There is no need to store the secret in `gradle.properties`. You can use `providers.environmentVariable` to achieve the same result of not storing the secret.
